Add .NET metrics (#283)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/dotnet/dotnet-http-metrics.md

- [HTTP server](#http-server)
  * [Metric: `http.server.request.duration`](#metric-httpserverrequestduration)
  * [Metric: `http.server.active_requests`](#metric-httpserveractive_requests)

<!-- tocstop -->

## HTTP client

All Http client metrics are reported by the `System.Net.Http` meter.

### Metric: `http.client.request.duration`

Client request duration measures the time it takes to receive response headers and doesn't include time to read the response body.

This metric follows the common [http.client.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration) definition.

Notes:

- Meter name is `System.Net.Http`
- Metric added in .NET 8.0
- When the `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httprequesterror) in snake_case, a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.
- `network.protocol.name` is not reported and should always be assumed to match `http`.
- `server.port` is not reported when it matches a default one for provided scheme (`443` for `https` and `80` for `http`)

> - `url.scheme` is always reported.

Author: The last two were one of the latest changes in HTTP semconv and now .NET is not fully aligned - created https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/94829 to track it

This article defines semantic conventions for HTTP metrics emitted by .NET components and runtime.

<!-- toc -->

- [HTTP client](#http-client)
  * [Metric: `http.client.request.duration`](#metric-httpclientrequestduration)
  * [Metric: `http.client.open_connections`](#metric-httpclientopen_connections)
  * [Metric: `http.client.connection.duration`](#metric-httpclientconnectionduration)
  * [Metric: `http.client.request.time_in_queue`](#metric-httpclientrequesttime_in_queue)
  * [Metric: `http.client.active_requests`](#metric-httpclientactive_requests)
- [HTTP server](#http-server)
  * [Metric: `http.server.request.duration`](#metric-httpserverrequestduration)
  * [Metric: `http.server.active_requests`](#metric-httpserveractive_requests)

<!-- tocstop -->

## HTTP client

All Http client metrics are reported by the `System.Net.Http` meter.

### Metric: `http.client.request.duration`

Client request duration measures the time it takes to receive response headers and doesn't include time to read the response body.

This metric follows the common [http.client.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration) definition.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

```

Author: this is a standard metric and we just say that it follows common semantics (and list what's different). 

Since it's the same boundaries as on a standard one, let's not mention them.

> Notes:

Reviewer 2: Related: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/520

> Notes:

Author: `network.protocol.name` is now conditionally required (when not `http` and version is set) - https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/477.

I.e. we can set the version and not set protocol as long as it's HTTP.

|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.connection.state` | string | State of the HTTP connection in the HTTP connection pool. | `active`; `idle` | Required |
| [`network.peer.address`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Remote IP address of the socket connection. | `10.1.2.80` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [1] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [2] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |
| [`url.scheme`](../attributes-registry/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Reviewer 2: I have hard time following the wording of the [original spec](https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/blob/c26aad838312eea9d53d781fb4328c2c61f9ea08/docs/attributes-registry/network.md)  this was copied from (what does "protocol client's version" mean???), but note that for connection metrics, `network.protocol.version` is being reported differently anyways. Considering [the way this is implemented](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/748dd8edecc3cc2b671cab7437adc4b0c750d0be/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/SocketsHttpHandler/HttpConnectionBase.cs#L47-L51), I recommend the following text, though not sure if the wording is compliant:

```suggestion
**[1]:** In connection metrics `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the underlying connection pool and might be different from the version specified in [`HttpRequestMessage.Version`](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httprequestmessage.version?view=net-7.0) or [`HttpClient.DefaultVersion`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httpclient.defaultrequestversion?view=net-7.0). Ie. if `HttpRequestMessage.Version` has a value of `1.0`, this attribute will be set to `1.0`.
```

Author: I rephrased it to 

> HTTP 1.0 and 1.1 requests share connections in the connection pool and are both reported as version `1.1`. So, the `network.protocol.version` value reported on connection metrics is different than the one reported on request-level metrics or spans for HTTP 1.0 requests.

WDYT?

Reviewer 2: Definitely sounds better than my proposal!

**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies:

- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) if it's sent in absolute-form.
- Host identifier of the `Host` header.

**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier; otherwise, it MUST match the `Host` header port identifier.

**[4]:** If not the default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

`http.connection.state` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `active` | active state. |
| `idle` | idle state. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.connection.duration`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0, 0.01, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2, 5, 10, 30, 60, 120, 300 ]`.

```

Reviewer 3: Since this a new config change, let's remove the bucket with the value `0` right away. We don't expect duration to be negative.

https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/298

<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.connection.duration(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.peer.address`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Remote IP address of the socket connection. | `10.1.2.80` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [1] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [2] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |
| [`url.scheme`](../attributes-registry/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Reviewer 2: Same as in the previous comment on `http.client.open_connections`.

Author: let's continue the discussion in the above thread (in any case they are all generated from yaml file)

**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies:

- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) if it's sent in absolute-form.
- Host identifier of the `Host` header.

**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier; otherwise, it MUST match the `Host` header port identifier.

**[4]:** If not the default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.request.time_in_queue`

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

```

| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |
| [`url.scheme`](../attributes-registry/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

**[1]:** HTTP request method value is one of the "known" methods listed in [RFC9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods) and the PATCH method defined in [RFC5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).
If the HTTP request method isn't known, it sets the `http.request.method` attribute to `_OTHER`.
It's not possible at the moment to override the list of known HTTP methods.

> **[2]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Reviewer 2: Same as in the related comment on `http.client.open_connections`.

Author: I wonder if it should be the case here since` request.time_in_queue` is per-request metrics and not the connection one.

It should also be possible to return `HttpRequestMessage.Version` there since there is a request object.
 https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/7990c077668117a74e967fac2afa5f7f6458ec07/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/SocketsHttpHandler/Metrics/SocketsHttpHandlerMetrics.cs#L35

I know it's too late to change in .NET 8, but WDYT about changing it at some point in the future?

Reviewer 2: We discussed this topic in a code review and conciously decided to go with the current behavior -- see https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/88981#discussion_r1265327139.

Even though this is strictly-speaking a request metric, it tells more about the state of the queues/connection pools than about the requests. This logic is also reflected in the EventCounter counterpart of this metric, where we have 3 EventCounters, one per each queue, see https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/diagnostics/available-counters#systemnethttp-counters.

Moreover, given that HTTP/1.0 is a niche legacy use-case, it's very unlikely we will spend efforts to change the current behavior.

Author: thanks for the explanation, I updated the metric definition.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `CONNECT` | CONNECT method. |
| `DELETE` | DELETE method. |
| `GET` | GET method. |
| `HEAD` | HEAD method. |
| `OPTIONS` | OPTIONS method. |
| `PATCH` | PATCH method. |
| `POST` | POST method. |
| `PUT` | PUT method. |
| `TRACE` | TRACE method. |
| `_OTHER` | Any HTTP method that the instrumentation has no prior knowledge of. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.active_requests`

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.active_requests(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `http.client.active_requests` | UpDownCounter | `{request}` | Number of active HTTP requests. [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `System.Net.Http`; Added in: .NET 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.active_requests(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`http.request.method`](../attributes-registry/http.md) | string | HTTP request method. [1] | `GET`; `POST`; `HEAD` | Recommended |

> | [`network.protocol.version`](../attributes-registry/network.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [2] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

`active_requests` doesn't report the protocol version. The related `[2]` footnote should be also removed.

- Host identifier of the `Host` header.

**[4]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier; otherwise, it MUST match the `Host` header port identifier.

**[5]:** If not the default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

`http.request.method` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `CONNECT` | CONNECT method. |
| `DELETE` | DELETE method. |
| `GET` | GET method. |
| `HEAD` | HEAD method. |
| `OPTIONS` | OPTIONS method. |
| `PATCH` | PATCH method. |
| `POST` | POST method. |
| `PUT` | PUT method. |
| `TRACE` | TRACE method. |
| `_OTHER` | Any HTTP method that the instrumentation has no prior knowledge of. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## HTTP server

All HTTP server metrics are reported by the `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting` meter.

### Metric: `http.server.request.duration`

Measures time to last byte. This metric follows the common [http.server.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration) definition.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

This metric SHOULD be specified with
[`ExplicitBucketBoundaries`](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/tree/v1.26.0/specification/metrics/api.md#instrument-advisory-parameters)
of `[ 0.005, 0.01, 0.025, 0.05, 0.075, 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1, 2.5, 5, 7.5, 10 ]`.

```

Author: since it's a standard metric which we refer to (and don't formally define it here), we don't need to document boundaries.

<!-- toc -->

- [HTTP client](#http-client)
  * [Metric: `http.client.request.duration`](#metric-httpclientrequestduration)
  * [Metric: `http.client.open_connections`](#metric-httpclientopen_connections)
  * [Metric: `http.client.connection.duration`](#metric-httpclientconnectionduration)
  * [Metric: `http.client.request.time_in_queue`](#metric-httpclientrequesttime_in_queue)
  * [Metric: `http.client.active_requests`](#metric-httpclientactive_requests)
- [HTTP server](#http-server)
  * [Metric: `http.server.request.duration`](#metric-httpserverrequestduration)
  * [Metric: `http.server.active_requests`](#metric-httpserveractive_requests)

<!-- tocstop -->

## HTTP client

All Http client metrics are reported by `System.Net.Http` meter.

### Metric: `http.client.request.duration`

Client request duration measures time it takes to receive response headers and does not include time to read response body.

This metric follows common [http.client.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration) definition.

Notes:

- Meter name is `System.Net.Http`
- Metric added in .NET 8.0

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When the `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.net.http.httprequesterror) in snake_case, a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.
```

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 4: @antonfirsov  can you remove `/en-us` from your suggestion.

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 2: Will these docs be localized? If not, to me it makes more sense to land on an English API doc page from an English spec.

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 4: > Will these docs be localized? If not, to me it makes more sense to land on an English API doc page from an English spec.

I can't speak for the team but GitHub only doc's are rarely localized. Good writing is far more important than localization because google translate is very good when the doc was written for MT (machine translation). I'm doing an edit pass for MT.

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 2: I would assume that if a user is proficient enough in English to read a documentation as advanced as a *specification*, there is a high chance they would prefer to see English terminology everywhere and find localizations confusing.

OFC it's just an opinion from personal experience, not going to die on this hill.

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 2: I changed the suggestion, because this is a discussion beyond the scope of the PR, but I remain skeptical in this field.

> - When `error.type` attribute is reported, it contains one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), a full exception type, or a string representation of received status code.

Reviewer 4: > I changed the suggestion, because this goes way beyond the scope of the PR, but I remain skeptical in this field.

The rule to remove `/lang-region` is MSFT wide, not something you could change at the .NET level.

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.connection.state` | string | State of HTTP connection in the HTTP connection pool. | `active`; `idle` | Required |
| [`network.peer.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Remote IP address of the socket connection. | `10.1.2.80` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [1] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [2] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |
| [`url.scheme`](../url/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Author: #415

**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
  if it's sent in absolute-form
- Host identifier of the `Host` header

> **[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, the `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.
```

> **[4]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[4]:** If not the default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).
```

`http.connection.state` MUST be one of the following:

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `active` | active state. |
| `idle` | idle state. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.connection.duration`

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.connection.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |

> | `http.client.connection.duration` | Histogram | `s` | The duration of successfully established outbound HTTP connections. [1] |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| `http.client.connection.duration` | Histogram | `s` | The duration of the successfully established outbound HTTP connections. [1] |
```

**[1]:** Meter name: `System.Net.Http`; Added in: .NET 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.connection.duration(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`network.peer.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Remote IP address of the socket connection. | `10.1.2.80` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [1] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [2] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |

> | [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |
```

| [`url.scheme`](../url/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.
```

Reviewer 4: I don't think  you need `used`.

> **[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies:
```

> - Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
>   if it's sent in absolute-form

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) if it's sent in absolute-form.
```

> - Host identifier of the `Host` header

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Host identifier of the `Host` header.
```

> **[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match the `Host` header port identifier.
```

**[4]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.request.time_in_queue`

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.request.time_in_queue(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `http.client.request.time_in_queue` | Histogram | `s` | The amount of time requests spent on a queue waiting for an available connection. [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `System.Net.Http`; Added in: .NET 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.request.time_in_queue(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`http.request.method`](../attributes-registry/http.md) | string | HTTP request method. [1] | `GET`; `POST`; `HEAD` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [2] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |

> | [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
> | [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |
```

| [`url.scheme`](../url/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** HTTP request method value SHOULD be "known" to the instrumentation.
> By default, this convention defines "known" methods as the ones listed in [RFC9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods)
> and the PATCH method defined in [RFC5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[1]:** HTTP request method value SHOULD be "known" to the instrumentation. By default, this convention defines "known" methods as the ones listed in [RFC9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods) and the PATCH method defined in [RFC5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).
```

> If the HTTP request method is not known to instrumentation, it MUST set the `http.request.method` attribute to `_OTHER`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the HTTP request method isn't known to instrumentation, it MUST set the `http.request.method` attribute to `_OTHER`.
```

> If the HTTP instrumentation could end up converting valid HTTP request methods to `_OTHER`, then it MUST provide a way to override
> the list of known HTTP methods. If this override is done via environment variable, then the environment variable MUST be named
> OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_HTTP_KNOWN_METHODS and support a comma-separated list of case-sensitive known HTTP methods
> (this list MUST be a full override of the default known method, it is not a list of known methods in addition to the defaults).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If the HTTP instrumentation could end up converting valid HTTP request methods to `_OTHER`, then it MUST provide a way to override the list of known HTTP methods. If this override is done via environment variable, then the environment variable MUST be named `OTEL_INSTRUMENTATION_HTTP_KNOWN_METHODS` and support a comma-separated list of case-sensitive known HTTP methods. The known HTTP methods MUST be a full override of the default known method, it's not a list of known methods in addition to the defaults.
```

> HTTP method names are case-sensitive and `http.request.method` attribute value MUST match a known HTTP method name exactly.
> Instrumentations for specific web frameworks that consider HTTP methods to be case insensitive, SHOULD populate a canonical equivalent.
> Tracing instrumentations that do so, MUST also set `http.request.method_original` to the original value.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
HTTP method names are case-sensitive and `http.request.method` attribute value MUST match a known HTTP method name exactly. Instrumentations for specific web frameworks that consider HTTP methods to be case insensitive, SHOULD populate a canonical equivalent. Tracing instrumentations that do so, MUST also set `http.request.method_original` to the original value.
```

> **[2]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

Reviewer 4: Can you do a global search and if appropriate, replace `HTTP client used` with `HTTP client`. It's easier to read without `used` and the prime directive of the MS style guide is `shorter is better`.

> **[3]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[3]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies:
```

> - Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
>   if it's sent in absolute-form

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) if it's sent in absolute-form.
```

- Host identifier of the `Host` header

> **[4]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[4]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, the `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier; otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.
```

**[5]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

> `http.request.method` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`http.request.method` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used; otherwise a custom value MAY be used.
```

Author: addressed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/build-tools/pull/222 - this sentence is generated by the tooling.

| `DELETE` | DELETE method. |
| `GET` | GET method. |
| `HEAD` | HEAD method. |
| `OPTIONS` | OPTIONS method. |
| `PATCH` | PATCH method. |
| `POST` | POST method. |
| `PUT` | PUT method. |
| `TRACE` | TRACE method. |
| `_OTHER` | Any HTTP method that the instrumentation has no prior knowledge of. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.active_requests`

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.active_requests(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `http.client.active_requests` | UpDownCounter | `{request}` | Number of active HTTP requests. [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `System.Net.Http`; Added in: .NET 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.active_requests(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`http.request.method`](../attributes-registry/http.md) | string | HTTP request method. [1] | `GET`; `POST`; `HEAD` | Recommended |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [2] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |

> | [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `example.com`; `10.1.2.80`; `/tmp/my.sock` | Required |
```

> | [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) the HTTP request is sent to. [4] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [5] |
```

| [`url.scheme`](../url/url.md) | string | The [URI scheme](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-3.1) component identifying the used protocol. | `http`; `https`; `ftp` | Recommended |

> **[1]:** HTTP request method value is one of the "known" methods listed in [RFC9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods)
> and the PATCH method defined in [RFC5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[1]:** HTTP request method value is one of the "known" methods listed in [RFC9110](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-methods) and the PATCH method defined in [RFC5789](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5789.html).
```

If the HTTP request method is not known, it sets the `http.request.method` attribute to `_OTHER`.

> It is not possible at the moment to override the list of known HTTP methods.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It's not possible at the moment to override the list of known HTTP methods.
```

**[2]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

> **[3]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[3]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies:
```

> - Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
>   if it's sent in absolute-form
> - Host identifier of the `Host` header

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) if it's sent in absolute-form.
- Host identifier of the `Host` header.
```

> **[4]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**[4]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is an absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match the URI port identifier; otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.
```

Reviewer 5: identifier; otherwise --> identifier; otherwise,

**[5]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

`http.request.method` has the following list of well-known values. If one of them applies, then the respective value MUST be used, otherwise a custom value MAY be used.

| Value  | Description |
|---|---|
| `CONNECT` | CONNECT method. |
| `DELETE` | DELETE method. |
| `GET` | GET method. |
| `HEAD` | HEAD method. |
| `OPTIONS` | OPTIONS method. |
| `PATCH` | PATCH method. |
| `POST` | POST method. |
| `PUT` | PUT method. |
| `TRACE` | TRACE method. |
| `_OTHER` | Any HTTP method that the instrumentation has no prior knowledge of. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## HTTP server

All HTTP server metrics are reported by `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting` meter.

### Metric: `http.server.request.duration`

> Measures time to last byte. This metric follows common [http.server.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration) definition.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Measures time to last byte. This metric follows the common [http.server.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpserverrequestduration) definition.
```

| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `http.client.open_connections` | UpDownCounter | `{connection}` | Number of outbound HTTP connections that are currently active or idle on the client [1] |

**[1]:** Meter name: `System.Net.Http`; Added in: .NET 8.0
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.open_connections(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `http.connection.state` | string | State of HTTP connection in the HTTP connection pool. | `active`; `idle` | Required |
| [`network.protocol.version`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Version of the protocol specified in `network.protocol.name`. [1] | `1.1`; `2` | Recommended |
| [`server.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Host identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [2] | `example.com` | Required |
| [`server.port`](../general/attributes.md) | int | Port identifier of the ["URI origin"](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#name-uri-origin) HTTP request is sent to. [3] | `80`; `8080`; `443` | Conditionally Required: [4] |

> | [`server.socket.address`](../general/attributes.md) | string | Server address of the socket connection - IP address or Unix domain socket name. [5] | `10.5.3.2` | Recommended: If different than `server.address`. |

Reviewer 2: The current implementation doesn't report UDS.
We should remember to update this to `network.peer.address`.

**[1]:** `network.protocol.version` refers to the version of the protocol used and might be different from the protocol client's version. If the HTTP client used has a version of `0.27.2`, but sends HTTP version `1.1`, this attribute should be set to `1.1`.

**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
  if it's sent in absolute-form
- Host identifier of the `Host` header

**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

**[4]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

**[5]:** When observed from the client side, this SHOULD represent the immediate server peer address.
When observed from the server side, this SHOULD represent the physical server address.
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.request.duration`

Client request duration measures time it takes for the call time to underlying client handler to complete request.

> If request was sent with `HttpCompletionOption.ResponseContentRead` option (the default value) then metric records time to last byte, otherwise (if `HttpCompletionOption.ResponseHeadersRead` was set), metric records time it took to receive response headers.

Author: this is not correct - client duration measures time to headers (per https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/205#discussion_r1319194521)

Reviewer 2: There are two contradicting goals:

If we wanted the span to cover content buffering, we would need to implement metrics in `HttpClient` / `HttpMessageInvoker` instead of a `MetricsHandler`, since handlers are not aware of `HttpCompletionOption`.

If we implemented metrics in `HttpClient`/`HttpMessageInvoker` it wouldn't be possible to log separate spans for redirections, as we agreed in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/discussions/3462.

This metric follows common [http.client.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration) definition.
The `server.socket.address` attribute is not available at the instrumentation point and is not reported.

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.request.duration(metric_table) -->
| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- |
| `http.client.request.duration` | Histogram | `s` | The duration of outbound HTTP requests. |
<!-- endsemconv -->

<!-- semconv metric.dotnet.http.client.request.duration(full) -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | Requirement Level |
|---|---|---|---|---|

> | `http.error.reason` | string | Request failure reason: one of [HTTP Request errors](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/c430570a01c103bc7f117be573f37d8ce8a129b8/src/libraries/System.Net.Http/src/System/Net/Http/HttpRequestError.cs), or a full exception type. | `System.Threading.Tasks.TaskCanceledException`; `name_resolution_error`; `secure_connection_error` | Conditionally Required: If request has failed. |

Reviewer 2: With https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/pull/91996 coming to 8.0, we should update this.

**[2]:** Determined by using the first of the following that applies

- Host identifier of the [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource)
  if it's sent in absolute-form
- Host identifier of the `Host` header

**[3]:** When [request target](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110.html#target.resource) is absolute URI, `server.port` MUST match URI port identifier, otherwise it MUST match `Host` header port identifier.

**[4]:** If not default (`80` for `http` scheme, `443` for `https`).

**[5]:** When observed from the client side, this SHOULD represent the immediate server peer address.
When observed from the server side, this SHOULD represent the physical server address.
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `http.client.request.duration`

Client request duration measures time it takes to receive response headers and does not include time to read response body.

This metric follows common [http.client.request.duration](../http/http-metrics.md#metric-httpclientrequestduration) definition.

> The `server.socket.address` attribute is not available at the instrumentation point and is not reported.

Reviewer 6: Is it necessary to re-define metrics here that already are defined in the domain specific conventions? I don't see much value in the duplication.

Also, there's #350, which proposes to remove `server.socket.address` from HTTP metrics.

Reviewer 7: @pyohannes I had basically the same concern / question here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/283#discussion_r1322627974

Reviewer 6: > @pyohannes I had basically the same concern / question here: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/pull/283#discussion_r1322627974

Just saw that.

I wonder if we could .NET specific additions/deviations in a way that doesn't require re-defining the complete metrics, maybe just in a textual form (without re-hashing the complete attribute table). This would make things clearer, in my opinion.

Reviewer 8: I agree that some form of linked reference + implementation errata seems like it would better convey the message that .NET is trying to implement a standard, not define it. However I'm (mostly) going to defer to OTel maintainers what you think the best way to present this is.

Author: I removed redefinitions of common metrics from .NET and added notes that describe differences, PTAL
